William Shakespeare is arguably the most famous writer of the English language, known for both his plays and sonnets. Though much about his life remains open to debate due to incomplete evidence, the following biography consolidates the most widely-accepted facts of Shakespeare's life and career.

In the mid-sixteenth century, William Shakespeare's father, John Shakespeare, moved to the idyllic town of Stratford-upon-Avon. There, he became a successful landowner, moneylender, glove-maker, and dealer of wool and agricultural goods. In 1557, he married Mary Arden.

During John Shakespeare's time, the British middle class was expanding in both size and wealth, allowing its members more freedoms and luxuries, as well as a stronger collective voice in local government. John took advantage of the changing times and became a member of the Stratford Council in 1557, which marked the beginning of his illustrious political career. By 1561, he was elected as one of the town's fourteen burgesses, and subsequently served as Constable, then Chamberlain, and later, Alderman. In all of these positions, the elder Shakespeare administered borough property and revenues. In 1567, he became bailiff - the highest elected office in Stratford and the equivalent of a modern-day mayor.

Town records indicate that William Shakespeare was John and Mary's third child. His birth is unregistered, but legend pins the date as April 23, 1564, possibly because it is known that he died on the same date 52 years later. In any event, William's baptism was registered with the town of Stratford on April 26, 1564. Little is known about his childhood, although it is generally assumed that he attended the local grammar school, the King's New School. The school was staffed by Oxford-educated faculty who taught the students mathematics, natural sciences, logic, Christian ethics, and classical languages and literature.

Shakespeare did not attend university, which was not unusual for the time. University education was reserved for wealthy sons of the elite, and even then, mostly just those who wanted to become clergymen. The numerous classical and literary references in Shakespeare’s plays are a testament, however, to the excellent education he received in grammar school, and speaks to his ability as an autodidact. His early plays in particular draw on the works of Seneca and Plautus. Even more impressive than Shakespeare's formal education is the wealth of general knowledge he exhibits in his work. His vocabulary exceeds that of any other English writer of his time by a wide margin.

In 1582, at the age of eighteen, William Shakespeare married twenty-six-year-old Anne Hathaway. Their first daughter, Susanna, was not baptized until six months after her birth - a fact that has given rise to speculation over the circumstances surrounding the marriage. In 1585, Anne bore twins, baptized Hamnet and Judith Shakespeare. Hamnet died at the age of eleven, by which time William Shakespeare was already a successful playwright. Around 1589, Shakespeare wrote Henry VI, Part 1, which is considered to be his first play. Sometime between his marriage and writing this play, he moved to London, where he pursued a career as a playwright and actor.

Although many records of Shakespeare's life as a citizen of Stratford have survived, including his marriage and birth certificates, very little information exists about his life as a young playwright. Legend characterizes Shakespeare as a roguish young man who was once forced to flee London under suspect circumstances, perhaps related to his love life, but the paltry amount of written information does not necessarily confirm this facet of his personality.

In any case, young Will was not an immediate universal success. The earliest written record of Shakespeare's life in London comes from a statement by his rival playwright Robert Greene. In Groatsworth of Witte (1592), Greene calls Shakespeare an "upstart crow...[who] supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you." While this is hardly high praise, it does suggest that Shakespeare rattled London's theatrical hierarchy from the beginning of his career. In retrospect, it is possible to attribute Greene's complaint to jealousy of Shakespeare's ability, but the scarcity of evidence renders the comment ambiguous.

With Richard III, Henry VI, The Comedy of Errors, and Titus Andronicus under his belt, Shakespeare became a popular playwright by 1590.* The year 1593, however, marked a major leap forward in his career when he secured a prominent patron: The Earl of Southampton. In addition, Venus and Adonis was published; it one of the first of Shakespeare's known works to be printed, and it was a huge success. Next came The Rape of Lucrece. By this time, Shakespeare had also made his mark as a poet, as most scholars agree that he wrote the majority of his sonnets in the 1590s.

In 1594, Shakespeare returned to the theater and became a charter member of the Lord Chamberlain's Men - a group of actors who changed their name to the King's Men when James I ascended the throne. By 1598, Shakespeare had been appointed the "principal comedian" for the troupe; by 1603, he was "principal tragedian." He remained associated with the organization until his death. Although acting and playwriting were not considered noble professions at the time, successful and prosperous actors were relatively well respected. Shakespeare’s success left him with a fair amount of money, which he invested in Stratford real estate. In 1597, he purchased the second largest house in Stratford - the New Place - for his parents. In 1596, Shakespeare applied for a coat of arms for his family, in effect making himself a gentleman. Consequently, his daughters made “good matches,” and married wealthy men.

The same year that he joined the Lord Chamberlain's Men, Shakespeare wrote Romeo and Juliet, Love's Labour's Lost, The Taming of the Shrew, and several other plays. In 1600, he wrote two of his greatest tragedies, Hamlet and Julius Caesar. Historians and scholars consider Hamlet to be the first modern play because of its multi-faceted main character and unprecedented depiction of the human psyche.

The first decade of the seventeenth century witnessed the debut performances of several of Shakespeare’s most celebrated works, including many of his so-called history plays: Othello in 1604 or 1605; Antony and Cleopatra in 1606 or 1607; and King Lear in 1608. The last of Shakespeare's plays to be performed during his lifetime was most likely King Henry VIII in either 1612 or 1613.

William Shakespeare died in 1616. His wife Anna died in 1623, at the age of 67. Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of his church at Stratford. The lines above his tomb, allegedly written by Shakespeare himself, read:

The son of a white American mother and a black Kenyan father, Obama grew up in Hawaii. Leaving the state to attend college, he earned degrees from Columbia University and Harvard Law School. Obama worked as a community organizer in Chicago, where he met and married Michelle LaVaughn Robinson in 1992. Their two daughters, Malia Ann and Natasha (Sasha), were born in 1998 and 2001, respectively. Obama was elected to the Illinois state senate in 1996 and served there for eight years. In 2004, he was elected by a record majority to the US Senate from Illinois and, in February 2007, announced his candidacy for president. After winning a closely fought contest against New York Senator and former First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic nomination, Obama handily defeated Senator John McCain of Arizona, the Republican nominee for president, in the general election.

When President Obama took office, he faced very significant challenges. The economy was officially in a recession, and the outgoing administration of George W. Bush had begun to implement a controversial "bail-out" package to try to help struggling financial institutions. In foreign affairs, the United States still had troops deployed in difficult conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan.

During the first two years of his first term, President Obama was able to work with the Democratic-controlled Congress to improve the economy, pass health-care reform legislation, and withdraw most US troops from Iraq. After the Republicans won control of the House of Representatives in 2010, the president spent significant time and political effort negotiating, for the most part unsuccessfully, with congressional Republicans about taxes, budgets, and the deficit. After winning reelection in 2012, Obama began his second term focused on securing legislation on immigration reform and gun control, neither of which he was able to achieve. When the Republicans won the Senate in 2014, Obama refocused on actions that he could take unilaterally, invoking his executive authority as president. In foreign policy, Obama concentrated during the second term on the Middle East and climate change.

Obama left the presidency, at age fifty-five, after his constitutionally limited two terms ended on January 20, 2017. He announced plans to remain in Washington, DC, until his younger daughter finished high school and, as a former president, to play a restrained but active role in public affairs. He also devoted energy to raising money and planning for the opening of the Obama Presidential Center in Chicago, Illinois.

Indian Parliament: Essay on Indian Parliament!

The Parliament of the Indian Union consists of two Houses: the Rajya Sabha (Council of States) and the Lok Sabha (House of the People).


ADVERTISEMENTS:


 
These two houses and the President together constitute the Parliament of India. The object behind the creation of the Rajya Sabha is to provide for a second chamber so that legislation passed by one House can be reviewed and altered if needed by the other.

Rajya Sabha is a continuing chamber as it is a permanent body not subject to dissolution. One-third of its members retire at the end of every two years and elections are held for the vacant positions. A member of Rajya Sabha has a six year term, unless he resigns or is disqualified.

Lok Sabha is the lower or the popular chamber of the Indian Parliament. Under the Constitution not more than 525 members are to be chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the States and not more than 20 members to represent the Union Territories. In addition, two members of the Anglo-Indian community may be nominated by the President if he is of the opinion that the community is not adequately represented in the Lok Sabha.

The President has the right to summon, prorogue and dissolve the Parliament. The power to dissolve and to prorogue is exercised by the President on the advice of his Council of Ministers. The dissolution brings the life of Lok Sabha to an end while prorogation merely terminates a session. Adjournment does not put an end to the existence of a session but merely postpones further transaction of business for a specified time, whereas prorogation puts an end to all business except Pending Bills.

ADVERTISEMENTS:


 
Each house of Parliament has its own presiding officers. Lok Sabha has a Speaker as its principal presiding officer and a Deputy Speaker to assist him and officiate as presiding officer in his absence. The Rajya Sabha is presided over by the Chairperson, assisted by a Deputy Chairperson. The latter performs all the duties and functions of the former in case of his/her absence.

The Speaker of the Lok Sabha enjoys very wide and extensive powers. The Speaker presides over the sitting of the Lok Sabha and conducts the proceedings, maintains order and decorum in the House and decides points of order, interprets and applies rules of the House.

The Speaker represents the whole House and it is on his impartiality that the success of parliamentary polity depends. Whenever the Speaker is absent, the Deputy Speaker presides over the deliberations of the House and exercise all the powers of the Speaker under the Rules of Procedure.

The Vice-President of India is the ex-officio Chairperson of the Council of States; but during any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the President, he does not perform the duties of the office of the Chieftain of the Council of States. The Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha is assisted by a Deputy Chairperson chosen from the Council of States from amongst its members.

Powers and Functions of the Parliament:
Under the cabinet system of government, the first function of Parliament is to select the group which will form the government, support, and sustain it in power as long as it enjoys its confidence. The second function of the Parliament is to make laws for the country. The third function of Parliament is to control the purse of the nation. The fourth function of Parliament is the scrutiny and control of administration.

The fifth function of Parliament is to serve as a kind of Constituent Assembly when necessary to amend the Constitution through the procedure laid down for the purpose. The sixth function of Parliament is to serve as an electoral college to elect the President and the Vice-President.

Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and Its Members:
Both the Houses of Parliament as well as of a State Legislature have similar privileges under the Constitution. The privileges of each House may be divided into two groups: (i) those enjoyed by the members individually and (ii) those which belong to each House of Parliament as a collective body.

Privileges of Individual Members:
(i) Freedom from Arrest:
Section 135A of the C.P. code, as amended by Act 104 of 1976 exempts a member from arrest during the continuance of a meeting of the Chamber or Committee of which he is a member or of a joint sitting of the Chambers or Committee, and during a period of 40 days before and after such meeting or sitting, in civil or original cases.

This privilege also means that no member can be arrested within the precincts of the Parliament without the permission of the House to which he belongs. A member can be arrested outside the walls of the House on cases under Preventive Detention or Maintenance of Internal Security or any other such Act.

ADVERTISEMENTS:


 
It is, how­ever, the duty of the arresting officer that he should immediately inform the presiding officer of the House to with the member belongs about arrest, bail or release of the member concerned. The main idea behind this privilege is that the members of the House should not be unnecessarily detained by the executive government and the constituents are not denied proper representation.

(ii) Freedom of Attendance as Witnesses:
According the English practice, a member cannot be summoned, without the leave of the House, to give evidence as a witness while Parliament is in session.

(iii) Freedom of Speech:
While an ordinary citizen’s right of speech is subject to the restrictions specified in Art. 19 (2) such as the law relating to defamation, a member of Parliament cannot be made liable in any court of law in respect of anything said in Parliament or any Committee thereof.

The freedom of speech is, however, subject to the rules framed by the House under its powers to regulate its internal procedure. The dignity of the House must be preserved. The Constitution itself imposes another limitation upon the freedom of speech in Parliament, namely, that no discussion shall take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any judge of the Supreme Court or a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the judge.

Collective Privileges:
Previleges are certain rights belonging to each House of Parliament. Both the House of Parliament as well as of a state legislature have similar previleges under the Constitution of India. Clauses (1) (2) of Article 105 deal with two matters, viz., freedom of speech and right of publicaiton.

(i) The right to publish debates and proceedings and the right to restrain publication by others.

(ii) The right to exclude others.

(iii) The right to regulate the internal affairs of the House, and to decide matters arising within its walls.

(iv) The right to punish Parliamentary misbehavior.

(v) The right to punish members and outsiders for breach of its privileges.

Parliamentary Committees:
As a deliberative body, Parliament cannot cope with detailed serious work amidst a large number of members in a dispassionate manner. Specially in modern times, there is too much of a burden on the Parliament. Thus the committee system comes in useful for it enables detailed discussion of various matters in small groups something that is cumbersome and non-productive in a large group.

The committees make parliamentary work smooth, efficient and expeditious. They also provide a certain expertise to the deliberations of Parliament. It must, however, be noted that committees are subordinate bodies created by Parliament to assist in its legislative work.

Nature of Parliamentary Committees:
A parliamentary committee is a committee which is appointed or elected by the House or nomi­nated by the Speaker and which works under the direction of the Speaker and presents its report to the House or to the Speaker.

Parliamentary committees are of different types. Broadly speaking there are (1) Ad Hoc Committees, and (2) Standing or Non-Ad Hoc Committees. Ad Hoc Committees may be constituted from time to time, by either House, to inquire into and report on specific subjects, or they may be committees set up to advise the House, such as those appointed to consider and report on a specific Bill. The Standing Committees may be classified according to their functions. The Committees may also be classified in the following manner.

1. There are consultative committees for different ministries which provide a forum for discussion on the policies and working of the ministries.

2. There are the select committees or joint select committees on individual bills for investigation or inquiry.

3. Sometimes, the Parliament may appoint a committee for a specific purpose or to study a particular question like the Committee for the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Tribes.

4. There are committees to enquire into various matters like the Committee of Petitions and Committee of Privileges. The committees to scrutinise are the Committee of Government Assurances and Committee on Subordinate Legislation.

5. Some committees are of administrative character relating to business of the House like (a) Committee on Absence of Members from the sittings of the House, (b) Business Advisory Committee, and (c) Rules Committee.

6. A few committees are concerned with the facilities of members of Parliament like the House Committee and Library Committee.

7. Finally, the most important committees are the three financial committees (a) the Estimates Committee, (b) the Public Accounts Committee, and (c) the Committee on Public Undertak­ings.

The Ad Hoc Committees:
The usual ad hoc committees are Select/Joint Committees on Bills and the Railway Convention Committee. The Committee on the Draft Five Year Plans, Committee on the Conduct of a member, Study Committee on Sports etc,. are some of the ad hoc committees constituted in the past.

Select Committees:
Select Committees are appointed on individual Bills and for making some investigation, inquiry or compilation. Members of a Select Committee are appointed or elected by the House itself or nominated by the Speaker. The willingness of the members desired to serve on the committee is ascertained before a proposal for appointment or nomination is made.

The Chairman is appointed by the Speaker from among its members, but if the Deputy Speaker happens to be a member of the committee, he shall be appointed Chairman. One-third of the total membership consti­tutes the quorum and a majority vote determines the decision of a committee. The chairman is entitled to a casting vote in case of a tie.

Joint Committee:
In order to avoid duplication of proceedings a Bill may be referred to a Joint Committee composed of members of both Houses. A Joint Committee also saves time and helps to bring about and develop good understanding, an appreciative spirit and co-operation between the representatives of both the Houses.

A motion for the appointment of a joint commit and reference of a Bill to such a committee after being carried out in the originating House is transmitted to the other House for its concurrence. The member-in-charge of a Bill indicates the number and names of the members constituting the committee from the House to which he belongs as also the number of the members from the other House. The proportion of members from the House of the People and the Council of States is two to one.

The Standing Committees:
Lok Sabha has the following 18 Standing Parliamentary Committees with membership indicated against each. Business Advisory Committee (15); Committee of Privileges (15); committee on absence of Members from the Sitting of the House (15); Committee on Estimates (30); Committee on Government Assurances (15); Committee on Paper Laid on the Table (15); Committee on Petitions (15); Committee on Private Members’ Bills and Resolutions (15); Committee on Public Account (22); Committee on Public Undertakings (22); Committee on Subordinate Legislation (15); Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (30); General Purpose Committee (29); House Committee (12); Joint Committee on Offices of Profit (15); Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament (15); Library Committee (9); Rules Committee (15).

No member is to be appointed or nominated or elected to a Committee unless he is willing to serve on it.

The Speaker, Lok Sabha, nominates members to Business Advisory Committee, Committee of Privileges, Committee on Absence of Members from the Sitting of the House, Committee on Govern­ment Assurances, Committee on Papers Laid on the Table, Committee on Petitions, Committee on Private Members’ Bills and Resolutions, Committee on Subordinate Legislation, General Purpose Committee, House Committee and Rules Committee in pursuance of the provisions of rules govern­ing these Committees.

Ten members of Lok Sabha and five members of Rajya Sabha are nominated by the Speaker, Lok Sabha, and the Chairman, Rajya Sabha, respectively, to the Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament.

As far as possible, different Parties and Groups are represented on a committee in proportion of their respective strength in the House. As such a Committee is a microcosm of the whole House.

Members of Rajya Sabha are also associated with the Committee on Public Accounts, Committee on Public Undertakings and Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, for which necessary Motions are moved in and adopted by both the Houses. The Joint Committee on Offices of Profit consists of 15 members-10 elected from Lok Sabha and five elected from Rajya Sabha. It is constituted in pursuance of a motion moved in and adopted by both the Houses. It continues in office for the duration of a Lok Sabha.

Casual vacancies in a Parliament Committee are filled by appointment or election by the House on a motion made, or nomination by the Speaker, as the case may be and any member appointed, elected or nominated to fill such vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired portion of the term for which the member in whose place he is appointed, elected or nominated would have held office.

A member may resign from the Committee by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker.

If a member remains absent from two or more consecutive sittings of the Committee without the permission of the Chairman of the Committee, he may be discharged from the Committee by the House Speaker.

The Chairmen of all the Parliamentary Committees are appointed by the Speaker, from amongst the members of the Committee. In case, the Speaker is a member of the Committee, he is ex officio Chairman of that Committee. In Gase the Speaker is not a member of the Committee, but the Deputy Speaker is, he is appointed as Chairman of that Committee.

The Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament elects its own Chairman. In case of the Committee on Public Accounts, as per established convention a member belonging to major Opposition Parties/Groups is appointed Chairman of the Committee by rotation.

Parliamentary Committees hold office for a period of one year or for a period specified by the Speaker/by the motion or until a new Committee is nominated. The members nominated to the Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament, hold office for a period of one year from the date of their nominations.

One-third of the total number of members of the Committee is required for the quorum to consti­tute a sitting of the Committee. In the absence of the required quorum, the Chairman either suspends the sitting until there is quorum or adjourns the sitting to some future day. In the event of a Committee being adjourned for-two successive sittings on account of lack of quorum, the Chairman has to report the fact to the Speaker when the Committee has been appointed by him or else to the House.

Estimates Committee:
The Estimates Committee consists of 30 members—all from Lok Sabha— who are elected by Lok Sabha every year from among its members according to the principle of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote. This system of election ensures that each Party/Group is represented on the Committee in proportion to its strength in Lok Sabha.

The Chairman of the Committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst the member of Lok Sabha elected to the Committee.

The functions of the Committee are—(a) to report what economies, improvements in organisation, efficiency or administrative reform, consistent with the policy underlying the estimates, may be effected; (b) to suggest alternative policies in order to bring about efficiency and economy in administration; (c) to examine whether the money is well laid out within the limits of the policy implied in the estimates; and (d) to suggest the form in which estimates shall be presented to Parliament.

The Committee may examine such of the estimates as may deem fit to the Committee or are specifically referred to it by the House or the Speaker. Public Undertakings allotted to the Committee on Public Undertakings either under the Rules of Procedure of Lok Sabha or by the Speaker are outside the purview of the Estimates Committee.

The Committee does not go against the policy approved by Parliament; but where it is established on evidence that a particular policy is not leading to the expected or desired results or is leading to waste, it is the duty of the Committee to bring to the notice of the House that a change in policy is called for.

The examination by the Committee of the estimates for the Ministries/Departments of Government is a continuing exercise throughout the financial year and the Committee reports to the House as its examination proceeds. It is not incumbent on the Committee to examine the entire estimates in any one year. The Demands for Grants may be finally voted even though the Committee has made no report.

Public Accounts Committee:
The Public Accounts Committee consists of 15 Members elected by Lok Sabha every year from amongst its members according to the principle of proportional repre­sentation by means of single transferable vote. Seven members of Rajya Sabha elected by the House in like manner are associated with the Committee. This system of election ensures that each Party/ Group is represented on the Committee in proportion to its respective strength in the two Houses.

The chairman of the committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst the members of Lok Sabha elected to the Committee.

The term of office of the members of the Committee is one year.

The Public Accounts Committee examines the accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by Parliament to meet the expenditure of the Government of India, the annual Finance Accounts of the Government of India and such other accounts laid before the House as the Commit­tee may think fit.

Apart from the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India on Appro­priation Accounts of the Union Government, the Committee examines two Reports of the Comptrol­ler and Auditor-General on Revenue Receipts—one relating to Direct Taxes and the other relating to Indirect Taxes.

The Committee, however, does not examine the accounts relating to such public undertakings as are allotted to the Committee on Public Undertakings.

While scrutinising the Appropriation accounts of the Government of India and the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General thereon, it is the duty of the Committee to satisfy itself that the moneys shown in the accounts as having been disbursed were legally available for, and applicable to, the service or purpose to which they have been applied or charged; that the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it; and that every re-appropriation has been made in accordance with the provisions made in this behalf under rules framed by competent authority.

An important function of the Committee is to ascertain that money granted by the Parliament has been spent by Government “within the scope of the demand”. The function of the Committee extends “beyond the formality of expenditure to its wisdom, faithfulness and economy”. The Committee thus examines cases involving losses, nugatory expenditure and financial irregularities.

While scrutinising the Reports of Comptroller and Auditor-General on Revenue Reports, the Committee examines various aspects of Government’s tax administration. The Committee, thus, examines cases involving under-assessments, tax-evasion, non-levy of duties, misclassifications etc., identifies loopholes in the taxation laws and procedures and makes recommendations in order to check leakage of revenue.

If any money has been spent on a service in excess of the amount granted by the House for the purpose, the Committee examines the same with reference to the Facts of each case, the circum­stances leading to such an excess, and makes such recommendations as it may deem fit.

Such excesses are thereafter required to be brought up before the House by Government for regularisation in the manner envisaged in Article 115 of the Constitution. In order to facilitate speedy regularisation of such expenditure by Parliament, the Committee presents a consolidated report relating to all Ministries/Departments expeditiously in advance of other reports.

Committee on Public Undertakings:
The Committee on Public Undertakings consists of 15 members elected by Lok Sabha every year from amongst its members according to the principles of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote. Seven members of Rajya Sahba elected by that House in like manner are associated with the Committee. This system of election ensures that each party/group is represented on the Committee in proportion with respective strength of the Houses.

The Chairman of the Committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst members of Lok Sabha elected to the Committee. The term of office of the members of the Committee is one year.

The functions of the Committee are to examine the Reports and Accounts of the Public Under­takings specified in the Fourth Schedule of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General thereon, if any, and to examine, in the context of the autonomy and efficiency of the public undertakings, whether the affairs of the Public undertakings are being managed in accordance with the sound business principles and prudent commercial practices.

The Committee may also examine such subjects or matters which may be specifically referred to it by the House or by the Speaker. The Committee is, however, barred from examining and investigating matters of major Government policy as distinct from business or com­mercial functions of public undertakings or matters for the consideration of which machinery is established by any special statute under which a particular undertaking is established.

Committee on the Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes:
The Committee consists of 20 members elected by Lok Sabha every year from amongst its members according to the principle of Proportional representation by means of single transferable vote. Ten members of Rajya Sabha elected by that House in like manner are associated with the Committee.

This system of election ensures that each Party/Group is represented on the Committee in proportion to its respective strength in the two Houses.

The Chairman of the Committee is appointed by the Speaker from amongst the members of Lok Sabha elected to the Committee.

The term of office of the members of the Committee is one year.

The important functions of the Committee inter alia are to consider the reports submitted by the Commissioner of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, to examine the representation of Sched­uled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in services of Central Government Departments, Central Public Undertakings, Nationalised Banks etc., and to review the working of welfare programmes for Sched­uled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Union Territories.

The Committee also examines such other matters as may deem fit to the Committee or are specifically referred to it by the House or the Speaker. The Committee can also examine the implementation of various programmes for the wel­fare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by State Governments provided funds are made available partly or wholly by the Central Government.

Business Advisory Committee:
As the membership of the Committee is limited and there are quite a large number of Opposition groups, it is not possible for the Speaker to nominate members from each and every group. Normally this committee meets three or four times in a session and makes recommendations regarding the plan of House’s work, which are generally accepted by the House.

However, in order to make the Committee as broad-based as possible certain prominent unattached members and members of some of the Opposition groups, who do not find representation in the Committee, are invited by the Speaker to attend its sitting. The invited members have neither the right to vote nor are they counted for the purpose of a quorum.

The function of the Business Advisory Committee is to recommend the time that should be allocated for discussion of the stage or stages of such Government Bills or other business which the Speaker in consultation with the Leader of the House may direct to be referred to the Committee. The Committee can indicate in the proposed timetable the different hours at which the various stages of Bill or other business should be completed.

Committee on Private Members’ Bills:
The Deputy Speaker is invariably its member and as far as possible every section of opinion of the House is represented therein. The functions of the Committee are ; to examine and classify all Private Members’ Bills according to their nature, urgency and importance; to allot time to Private Members’ Bill and resolution; to examine Private Members’ Bill seeking to amend the Constitution before their introduction in the House; to examine a Private Members’ Bill which is opposed in the House on the ground that the Bill initiates legislation outside the legislative competence of the House and to perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Speaker from time to time.

Committee on Petitions:
Article 350 entitles a citizen to submit representation for the r dress of grievance to any officer or authority in the Union or a State. It is also considered an inherit right of a citizen to present a petition to Parliament ventilating public grievances and offering suggestions on matters of public importance. Rules of the Lok Sabha (160-67) provide for such petition to be presented.

The Committee on Petitions examines the merits of the petitions and makes recommendations to the House after taking such evidence as it may deem necessary. No minutes of dissent can be appended to the Report of the Committee.

Committee on Government Assurances:
It is meant to scrutinize the assurances, promises, undertakings etc. given by Ministers from time to time and to report on the extent to which such assurances etc. have been implemented and to see whether such implementation has taken place within the minimum time necessary for the purpose. The Council of States has no such Committee.

Committee on Privileges:
The Committee is set up to examine every question involving breach of privilege of the House or of the member of any Committee thereof, referred to it by the House or by the Speaker. Also to determine with reference to the facts of each case whether a breach of privilege is involved and make suitable recommendations in its report.

In this committee the deputy speaker is the chairman who presides over its meetings.

Committee on Subordinate Legislation:
This Committee is set up to scrutinize and report to the House whether the powers to make regulations, rules, sub-rules, by-laws etc., conferred by the Constitution or delegated by Parliament are being properly exercised by the executive within the scope of such delegation.

Committee on Absence of Members from the Sittings of the House:
This Committee is set up to consider application from members for leave of-absence from the sittings of the House and examine every case where a member has been absent for a period of 60 days or more, without permissions, from the sittings of the House.

Rules Committee:
This Committee is set up to consider matters of procedure and conduct of business in the House and recommend any amendments or additions to the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha that are considered necessary.

Committee Dealing with Facilities:
There are three committees dealing with provisions of facilities to members-the General Purposes Committee, the House Committee and the Library Com­mittee. The function of the General Purposes Committee is to consider and advice on such matters concerning the affairs of the House as may be referred to it by the Speaker. The House Committee deals with matters of accommodation, food and medical aid for members.

The functions of the Library Committee are: to consider and advise on such matters concerning the Library as may be referred to it by the Speaker, to consider suggestions for the improvement of the Library, and to assist members in fully utilising the services provided by the Committee.

Committee on Papers Laid on the Table:
This Committee is set up to examine all papers laid on the Table of the House by Ministers (other than those which fall within the purview of the Committee on Subordinate Legislation or any other Parliamentary Committee) and to report to the House— (a) whether there has been compliance of the provisions of the Constitution, Act, rule or regulation under which the paper has been laid; (b) whether there has been any unreasonable delay in laying the paper; (c) if there has been such delay, whether a statement explaining the reasons for delay has been laid on the Table of the House and whether those reasons are satisfactory; (d) whether both the Hindi and English versions of the paper have been laid on the Table; (e) whether statement explaining the reasons for not laying the Hindi version has been given and whether such reasons are satisfactory; and (f) such other functions in respect of the papers laid on the Table as may be assigned to it by the Speaker from time to time.

Joint Committee on Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament:
This Committee is set up to make rules, after consultation with the Central Government to provide for travelling and daily allowances, medical, housing, telephone, postal, water, electricity, constituency and secretarial facilities etc. to members of both Houses. This committee has 15 members nominated by the speaker to look into the cases regarding the violation of privileges of members of Parliament and recommend suitable action.

Joint Committee on Offices of Profit:
The function of this Committee is to examine the composition and character of the Committees appointed by the Central and State Governments and to recommend what offices should disqualify and what offices should not disqualify a person for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of the Parliament under Article 102 of the Constitution. It is also to scrutinise from time to time the Schedule to the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act, 1959 and to recommend any amendments in the said Schedule, whether by way of addition, omission or otherwise.

Consultative Committees:
In 1954, the Government decided to establish Informal Consultative Committees for the various Ministries. But the Opposition parties and groups did not take kindly to the Consultative Committees. As a result of discussion between the Government and the opposition at different levels in 1969, it was decided to delete the word ‘Informal’ from their nomenclature.

Mutually agreed “guidelines” were also formulated to regulate their functioning. The Government, however, did not accept the suggestion of the Opposition for the formation of the Parliamentary Committees in place of Consultative Committees.

Members of both Houses of Parliament are nominated on the Consultative Committees for various Ministers by the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs on the basis of preference indicated by the members themselves or by the party leaders. Members of the Opposition parties are nominated in proportion to their numerical strength in Parliament.

Every Opposition party or group has, thus, its fixed quota of representation on the Consultative Committees and these parties and groups are free to nominate their members on more than one Committee within the quota allotted to them. The Minister concerned presides over the meetings of the Consultative Committee attached to his Ministry.

The Committee provide a forum of informed discussions between the members, Ministers and-senior officials of the Government on the problems and policies of the Government relating to administration in a manner which is not practicable on the floor of the House. The deliberations of these Committees are informal and no reference to the discussions held in the meetings is made on the floor of the House and it is binding on the Government as well as the members of the Committees.

Members of these Committees are free to discuss any matter which can appropriately be discussed in Parliament. The practice is to invite suggestions and items for discussion from members and thereupon agenda with notes is prepared and circulated among members. The Committees cannot summon witnesses, send for or demand the production of any files, or examine any official records.

The Chairman of the Committee may, however, furnish any additional information required by members. But the Consultative Committees, it is widely felt, do not function as committees, and still less discharge the functions of consultation except in a purely formal sense. The committee, attached to a Ministry, does not meet by itself without the Minister to discuss or deliberate. It is convened by the Minister. Polemics and partisanship are as present in the committees’ deliberations as they are in Parliament itself.

Working of the Parliament:
Article 118 empowers each House of Parliament to make rules for regulating its procedure and conduct of its business. This rule-making power of the Houses is, however, subject to the Provisions of this Constitution. Parliament may for the purpose of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure and conduct of business, in each Houses of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to any Money Bill (Article 119).

The business of Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English. However, the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha or the Speaker of the Lok Sabha, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to address the House in his mother-tongue.

The New Parliament after Election:
At the commencement of the first session after each general election to the Lok Sabha and at the commencement of first session in each year, the President addresses both the houses of Parliament in a joint session. The President’s address at the com­mencement of the first session of the year is a regular feature. The Parliament takes up the regular business after the address of the President.

Conduct of Business:
Oath or Affirmation by Members:
Every member of either House of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule (Article 99).

Voting in Houses, Power of Houses to Act Notwithstanding Vacancies and Quorum:
Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker [Article 100(1)].

The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.

Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the member­ship thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings [Article 100(2)].

Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the total number of members of the House [Article 100(3)].

If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum [Article 100(4)].

Delegated Legislation:
An inevitable consequence of extension in the activities of the State, particularly when it aims to establish a socialistic society, is the sizable increase in legislation. Since it is not possible for the legislature to enact measures so numerous and so comprehensive, delegation of authority to the Executive becomes not only necessary but quite inescapable. In fact, it would not be incorrect to say that today; the volume of delegated legislation greatly exceeds the Acts of Parliament.

Delegated legislation is usually concerned with minor matters to give effect to the provisions of the Statutes. But it is not always so. There are instances both in India and other countries, where important powers, such as the power to determine matters of principle, to impose taxation, to amend Acts of Parliament, to create new offences and prescribe penalties have been delegated.

These are, no doubt, abnormal instances of legislative delegation of authority, but they are by no means rare. The rules and regulations thus made have the force of law and they cannot be challenged in courts unless they are ultra virus of the parent Acts.

The rules framed there under are very often vexatious to the citizens as the administrative officers concerned with the framing of the rules exalt administrative convenience and the national advantage at the expense of the individual and his freedom. To safeguard against the abuse of power it is, therefore, for Parliament to keep a watchful and even jealous eye on delegated legislation at all its stages.

The usual safeguards are: defining the limits of delegation, laying down a special procedure for rule making, giving adequate publicity to the proposed rules, requiring the rules made to be laid on the table of the House and the process of scrutiny.

Two Rules of the Procedure of the Lok Sabha (House of the People) set down important provisions. Rule No. 70 states that “a Bill involving proposals for the delegation of legislative power shall further be accompanied by a memorandum explaining such proposals and drawing attention to their scope and stating also whether they are of normal or exceptional character.”

Rule No. 222 prescribes “Each regulation, ‘rule’, ‘sub-rule’, ‘bye-law’, etc, framed in pursuance of the legislative function delegated by Parliament to a subordinate authority and which is required to be laid before the House shall subject to such rules as the Speaker may in consultation with the Leader of the House prescribe, be numbered centrally and published in the Gazette of India immediately after they are promulgated.

The scrutiny of delegated legislation by Parliament itself is of recent origin. In some respects India has established certain advantageous precedents with regard to subordinate legislation. The Speaker has invariably appointed a member of the Opposition as chairman of the committee on Subordinate Legislation. Since the membership of this Committee is not open to Ministers, it has functioned as a well-knit business committee free from official influence, party spirit and party whip.

Government Bills:
Government bills are piloted by members of the Council of Ministers. The decision on government bills is taken by the Cabinet and its Parliamentary Affairs Committee. The order of government business in the house is decided by consultations between the leaders of the House and the Speaker, or the Chairman, as the case may be.

Method of Passing Laws:
A bill other than money bills may be introduced in either house of Parliament. It has to be passed in identical form and consented by both houses before it can be presented for the President’s assent. Money bills can be introduced only in the lower house. All legislative proposals must be brought in the form of Dills before Parliament.

First Reading:
The legislative process starts with the introduction of the bill in either house of Parliament. After a bill has been introduced, it is published in the official Gazette. But, even before introduction, a bill might, with the permission of the Speaker, be published in the Gazette.

Second Reading:
The Second Reading consists of consideration of the bill in two stages. The first stage consists of a general discussion on the bill as a whole.

The second stage of the second reading consists of clause by clause consideration of the bill as introduced or as reported by the Select Committee or Joint Select Committee.

Third Reading:
After the various stages of the second reading are completed, the member-in- charge can move that the bill be passed. This stage is called the third or the final reading of the bill. At this stage, debate is confined to arguments either in support of the bill or in rejection, without referring to the details thereof further than is absolutely necessary.

After the bill is passed by one house, it is sent to the other house for concurrence with a mes­sage to that effect. In the other house also it goes through the three stages. In regard to money bills, the Lok Sabha has got the exclusive power to legislate and the Rajya Sabha can only recommend amendments therein and must return such a bill to the Lok Sabha within fourteen days from the date of its receipt.

Assent of the President:
When a bill is passed by both houses, the Secretariat of the house obtains the assent of the President and the bill becomes an Act.

The President can give his assent or withhold his assent to a bill. The President can also return the bill-except, of course, a money bill—with his recommendations to the house for reconsideration, and if the houses pass the bill again with or without amendments, the bill has to be assented to by the President.

Financial Powers:
The power to authorise the raising and spending of money rests with the Lok Sabha. The initiative must, of course, come from the Executive in the form of the Budget. In the words of the Constitution, the President shall, in respect of every financial year, cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India for that year, referred to as the ‘annual financial statement; A distinction is made between votable expendi­ture and expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, while the former is voted upon, the latter is not subject to voting, although it is included in the statement of expenditure laid before the House and can be discussed.

Vote on Account:
The process of voting of Demands continues for a long time while day to day expenditure of the government departments cannot wait till the Budget is finally passed. To meet this difficulty, a new device was introduced in 1950 known as the ‘Vote on Account’.

The passing of the Vote on Account followed by the appropriation (Vote on Account Act) authorizes the Government to draw on the Consolidated Fund of India, generally for a period of two months. The Vote on Account which is usually passed without debate enables the house to consider the budget at leisure.

Parliamentary Methods to Control the Executive:
The rules of procedure and conduct of business in Parliament provide that unless the presiding officer otherwise directs, the first hour of every sitting shall be available for the asking and answering of questions. This first hour is known as the Question Hour.

The primary object of an ‘adjournment motion’ is to draw the attention of the house to a recent matter of urgent public importance having serious consequences.

A member may with the previous permission of the Speaker call the attention of a minister to any matter of public importance and request the Minister to make a statement on the subject. The minis­ter may either make a brief statement immediately or he may ask for time to the statement at the later hour or date. The main purpose of a ‘calling attention’ is to seek an authoritative statement from the concerned Minister on a matter of urgent public importance.

Committee System to Control Government:
Parliament has established a series of committees with necessary powers to scrutinise the working of the different departments of the government.

The Parliamentary Committees ensure an effective and comprehensive examination of all the proposed policies. Very often, the Committees provide an ideal context for discussing controversial and sensitive matters in a non-partisan manner, away from the glare of publicity.

